yeah
good evening I'm Judy Woodruff
and I'm
hari Sreenivasan on the NewsHour
tonight
a big day at the US Supreme
Court
justices split for 24 on a
challenge to
President Obama's immigration
policy
plus a decision that colleges
can take
race into consideration in
deciding whom
to admit also had this thursday
the
politics of guns with official
cameras
turned off
Democrats turn to social media
to
document their more than 24 hour
long
city in protest on the house
floor and a
fateful day for the UK in a
closely
divided vote
millions of britons decide their
future
with the European Union
all that and more on tonight's
PBS
Newshour
the Supreme Court weighed in on
too
politically charged cases today
the
justices in a 4-4 tie
effectively killed
President Obama's executive
actions on
immigration his program would
have
deferred deportation for more
than four
million undocumented immigrants
and
allowed them to work legally in
the US
President Obama reacted to the
court's
decision at the White House
morning
everybody
no more than two decades now our
immigration system everybody
acknowledges has been broken and
the
fact that the Supreme Court
wasn't able
to issue a decision today
doesn't just
set the system back even further
it
takes us further from the
country that
we aspire to be
this is part of the consequence
of the
Republican failure so far to
give a fair
hearing
- mr. Merrick garland my nominee
to the
Supreme Court and in another
major
decision the justices ruled it
is
constitutional for universities
in this
case the University of Texas to
consider
race in admissions
we'll take a closer look at
today's
Supreme Court rulings right
after this
new summary another police
officer in
Baltimore has been found not
guilty in
the 2015 death of a 25 year old
black
man Freddie gray Caesar Goodson
was
driving the police van in which
gray
suffered a broken neck while in
custody
goods and face the most serious
charges
of all the officers involved
he was acquitted on all counts
including
second-degree murder
dozens of protesters gathered
outside
the courthouse in baltimore
today to
voice their frustrations
we are everybody's we desire
we did that that the right to
walk in
our community and right after
media may
be safe that people we think
that
disciple protected would have
started
and how many protected
not exactly like pretty great
six police
officers have been charged in
the case
but only Goodson was accused of
committing murder
the first trial ended in a hung
jury the
second officer was acquitted of
all
charges in the presidential
campaign
Republican Donald Trump was
forced today
to defend claims he has made the
Democrat Hillary Hillary
Clinton's
emails were hacked
while she was Secretary of State
yesterday Trump said quote her
server
was easily hacked by foreign
governments
perhaps even by her financial
backers in
communist China putting all of
America
and our citizens in danger and
quote but
today Trump took a step back
when he was
pressed by Lester Holt of NBC
News
you also made the claim that her
email
personal email server had been
hacked
probably by foreign governments
suggesting that you don't know
that it
hasn't wanted maybe but
suggesting that
that she would be compromised as
president what evidence do you
have a
physical she shouldn't have had
a
personal server
ok she shouldn't have it it's
illegal
what she did is illegal now she
might
not be judged that way because
you know
we have a rigged system but what
she did
is illegal she shouldn't have a
personal
but is there any evidence that
it was
hacked other than routine
physical i
read that and I heard it and
somebody
who also gave me that
information
I will report back to you i'll
give it
to you Clinton's campaign has
maintained
there is no evidence
hackers ever penetrated her
private
email server in China a powerful
tornado
has killed at least 78 people
and
leveled a large number of
buildings some
500 people were injured
it hit a densely populated area
near the
city of young song about 500
miles south
of beijing the twister
overturned cars
roads were blocked with trees
down power
lines and other debris
there were reports of winds up
to about
80 miles per hour in some parts
it was a historic day for
columbia
as the government signed a
ceasefire
with left as FARC rebels closing
a
half-century long chapter of
bloodshed
at a ceremony in havana cuba the
colombian president and the
leader of
the FARC formally approve the
agreement
to settle long-standing
obstacles to
peace
including the farts disarmament
that now
clears the way for a final peace
deal
which negotiators hope to clinch
by July
twentieth back in this country
the
federal government now says
filter tap
water is safe for everyone in
flint
michigan the announcement lifts
a
recommendation that pregnant
women
nursing mothers and children
under six
only drink bottled water to
avoid let
exposure the city's drinking
water
became contaminated when led
from old
pipes leached into homes and
businesses
triggering a public health
emergency
volkswagen will pay more than 10
billion
dollars to settle claims tied to
its
diesel emissions cheating
scandal
it was widely reported the
majority of
the money will compensate owners
of
nearly 500,000 vehicles program
to cheat
on emissions tests
the rest will penalize
government
agencies and fund pollution
offset
projects
the final terms of the
settlement will
be released Tuesday stock Sir
John Wall
Street today is traders eagerly
awaited
the outcome of today's British
referendum on whether to remain
in the
European Union the dow jones
industrial
average gained 230 points to
close at
eighteen thousand eleven the
nasdaq rose
more than 76 points and the S&P
added nearly 28 new data out
today from
the US Census Bureau shows
asians
continue to be the fastest
growing
racial group in the US the asian
population rose three-point-four
percent
over the past year while the
white
population including those who
chose
white along with another race
showed the
slowest growth up just one half
of a
percent
there are 21 million asians in
the US
the population has steadily
surge since
2000 largely due to
international
migration and after decades of
debate a
los angeles jury has ruled led
zeppelin
did not steal the opening riff
of their
classic song stairway to have it
rock
band was accused of copying the
cords
from a song by the american band
spirit
the two groups played together
in
nineteen seventy a year before
stairway
to have
release here's Led Zeppelin's
iconic
guitar opening as heard in this
performance
and here are the chords in
question from
the band spirit song tourists so
you can
judge for yourself
mmm
the jury ruled the chords of the
two
songs were not intrinsically
similar
still to come on the NewsHour
big
supreme court decisions on
immigration
and affirmative action
what will happen if Britain
leaves the
European Union House Democrats
it in for
more than 24 hours to push gun
control
legislation and much more
yeah
we return now to the big day at
the US
Supreme Court a split on
immigration
puts millions in limbo and
justices
uphold affirmative action we dig
into
both cases now with news our
regular
Marcia Coyle chief Washington
correspondent for the National
Law
Journal Marcia Judy
we know you we need you here on
days
like this especially on days
like this
let's talk about the affirmative
action
case first what was it that the
university of texas case was
about
well actually this was the
second time
the Supreme Court had looked at
how the
university of texas uses race as
a
factor in its admissions policy
back in
2013 the case came to the
Supreme Court
by abigail fisher a student who
was
denied admissions to the
University in
2008 and she claimed that the
use of
race as a factor was why she was
denied
admission and that it violated
the
Constitution the supreme court
in 2013
led by Justice Kennedy a 71
court sent
it back to the lower federal
courts
saying you gave too much
deference to
the university's explanation
you have to give the toughest
scrutiny
we have under the Constitution
and the
university has shown has to show
their
no workable race-neutral
alternatives
well that lower federal
appellate court
held hearings briefings upheld
the plan
again
it came back to the Supreme
Court
abigail fisher brought it back
with a
conservative organization that
had
backed her from the beginning
and the
supreme court today and it's
surprising
for three decision upheld the
university's use of race as
Justice
Kennedy said a factor of a
factor of a
factor
why do you so surprising he had
never
voted to uphold an affirmative
action
plan although he had written and
spoken
about the importance of
diversity in
higher education so he did
believe that
it was an important that
compelling
interest to have a diverse
student body
now this was a there were some
really
strong opinions voiced here is
Justice Alito wrote this is
affirmative
action gone wild gone berserk
that's what he said he actually
read a
summary of his very long descent
is
descent was 51 pages
he read it from summary from the
bench
for 17 minutes almost three
times longer
than Justice Kennedy summary of
his
opinion and he took issue with
most of
the points Justice Kennedy meant
made by
the way Justice Kennedy said
that this
plan is really sort of one of a
kind for
the university of texas under
texas
state law the university is
required to
admit students in the top 10% of
their
high school classes and that has
accounted for significant
diversity but
the University felt that the
25-percent
places in in the in the school
that the
ten percent did not cover did
not really
create diversity in the
classroom so
that's why i used race
Justice Kennedy said that the
10-percent
plan was really a blunt tool
that it
just it admitted students on the
basis
of class rank and the other
twenty-five
percent were admitted under a
holistic
view of that he considered many
other
things but Justice Alito in his
dissent
felt that this plan
discriminated
against asian americans and he
felt that
the university had not provided
the kind
of evidence that it was required
to
provide to show that it had it
needed
race to achieve the type of
diversity at
wanted in the classroom
let me quickly move you to the
other big
decision the court handed down
on
President Obama's immigration
executive
orders the justices were asked
to rule
on the legality of that tell us
about
how they how they came down
well this was a plan that was
announced
in 2014 by the administration
and it did
two things it would delay
temporarily
the deportation of parents
undocumented
parents of children who are
American
citizens in
legal permanent residents and
also
expanded a 2012 program that
delay the
deportation of what we have come
to call
the dreamers children who came
to
america with undocumented
parents Texas
and 26 other republican-led
states
challenge that put program in
the lower
federal court in Texas
it claimed that the President
had
exceeded his authority under
federal
immigration laws a federal
district
court temporarily entered an
injunction
to halt it a federal appellate
court
affirmed that injunction
so it was the united states that
came to
this US supreme court to try to
get that
injunction lifted also to
confirm that
the President had this Authority
well the Court did split for for
today
and what that means is basically
that
the injunction that's halting
the
program remains in effect the
case goes
back to the lower federal
district court
for a trial on the merits the
courts for
for decision here only affirm
the
judgment of the lower court on
preliminary injunction
it was not a decision on the
merits of
the claim that Texas in the 25
other
states made so can you so what
can be
read into this very brief
statement the
court made nothing
it it it's as I said it's not a
decision
on the merits
it's not a precedent going
forward that
other courts can look to the
case may
come back to the Supreme Court
at some
point once it goes through trial
and
appeal the United States also
has the
option of filing a petition for
rehearing in the US Supreme
Court which
the court can hold until there
is a
ninth justice if it so chooses
and just
quickly the presumption is the
absence
of the late Justice Scalia
clearly had a
very much so as well as today
there was
another 44 decision in a case
involving
Indian tribes important to them
and
American businesses
Marcia Coyle thanks very much my
pleasure Judy
and now we take a deeper look at
that
case the impact of today's
immigration
split on life outside the court
Angela Maria Kelly is with the
center
for american progress for a time
she
advised the Obama administration
on
immigration and John theory is a
legal
policy analyst analyst at the
Center for
Immigration Studies welcome to
both of
you
Angela Kelly let me start with
you your
reaction to this one-sentence
statement
they handed down on this
immigration
nine poultry words but boy it
was a big
what a big blow
but look as is Michael just said
what
this is not a marshal yeah it's
a
disappointment but it's not a
decision
and we're not done
we have 11 million people in
this
country the average number of
years that
they've been here is 12 so these
are not
folks that are just stopping by
there
not accidental tourist there are
people
who are living here and we can't
send
them all home as some
presidential
candidates might want have
happen
because they are home
so the question is what are we
going to
do about it I think the
president's plan
is legal and ultimately we will
be back
in front of the court and i
think that
will prevail
we do need a nice justice it's
been a
hundred days since Judge Garland
was
nominated and he has not yet had
his day
in court he hasn't yet had his
hiring
but John theory i mean it
it's true they're the justices
didn't
elaborate but the effect of this
is to
send this back to the lower
court
yeah i think what people are
wondering
why the court even took it up to
begin
with because all this is done is
delayed
and inevitable rehearing back up
at the
Supreme Court a year or two from
now so
it's unclear how long this is
going to
take but in some ways a lot of
folks
were arguing that perhaps the
court
should have waited and tell the
lower
court actually had a hearing on
the
merits so we would have some
idea of
exactly what issues we were
looking at
and where perhaps the White
House was
going to be successful and where
they
were not what they were dealing
with
what 26 x large number of states
that
had asked them to do to rule on
26 states yes but as I recall
the
state's themselves requested the
supreme
court that they not take the
decision
and in fact that they wait until
there
was a hearing at the lower court
level
what does this mean you started
to
address this Angela in your
first
comment what does this mean for
the
individuals who I mean President
Obama
talked today about people coming
out of
the shadows
what does it mean for them
that's right
i mean they look their lives
remain in
limbo but their lives remain
here as I
said people have already been
here for
nearly a dozen years on average
we're talking about people who
have US
citizen children so clearly they
put
down roots
most of them work course and pay
taxes
never perhaps ever see that
refund
so the folks that are
contributing to
the economy as well so I think
unfortunately that they are
stuck in the
crosshairs of paralysis in
Washington
which is in Congress and which
unfortunately is now spilled to
the
court but i don't see that
they're going
to all pack up and leave but
what about
that John . indeed should they
pack up
and leave
well I don't know that there has
been a
paralysis necessarily it's just
that the
advocates for amnesty and more
immigration haven't got what
they wanted
and President Obama himself
knows that
this policy is unpopular if it
were
popular
he wouldn't wait until after the
midterm
to announce this he didn't want
to have
to have Republicans or Democrats
defending something while photos
were
heading to the ballot box so you
with
the people are spoken they've
denied the
marco rubio sure
amnesty bill they stopped the
amnesty
back under president bush and
the DREAM
Act which has been introduced
multiple
times went nowhere
so it's not so much that we're
in limbo
it's just that we have
administration
not that different from the
previous
administration that isn't
committed to
enforcing our immigration laws
and so
you're saying that it is that
what that
what should happen to these
individuals
well under federal law they are
supposed
to go home I mean I was mom
it was noted i'm gonna go that
they're
not terrorists but in fact 20 of
them
actually did come as to us they
just
like to State Department and
like the
American people who overstayed
their
visas and so if we're going to
have any
sense of rule of law in this
country
people have to abide by the
terms that
we set forth in the comment
what about that in well we do
have look
a record number of people who
have been
deported into this president has
hardly
been a softy on illegal
immigration and
we have a terminal
and this build up at the border
so that
illegal immigration the United
States is
basically a 20 on the question
is what
are we going to do about these
folks and
i think that the President did
wait very
patiently the Senate did pass a
bipartisan bill on conference
immigration reform and the house
failed
to act so I met it's a question
of it's
not an amnesty but i think is
what we
need is an answer
and interestingly enough of
poles that
came out yesterday show that
seventy
eight percent of Independence
support
with the 11 million not
supporting them
but giving them a path to
citizenship so
we're talking about just very
sensible
what are we going to do what are
some
common sense solutions but in
the
meantime the court
maybe we don't have an answer
correct
and in the meantime mr. furious
. is
that they are here illegally
they are
here on without documents
well mr. theory should feel
comfortable
in the fact that immigration
deportations are going to
continue that
we have a robust ice presents
and Border
Patrol forces but that to me
isn't isn't
really the answer look we have
an
immigration system that hasn't
been
updated since 1990
we just think about that and so
until
Congress does its job in the
points a
knife or a present
nice justice on the Supreme
Court passes
immigration reform
we're going to have these these
functions not just in our
immigration
system but across many sectors
of
america and clearly we deserve
better
of course if you look at actual
ice data
deportations have fallen
dramatically
over the past five or six years
and not
just deportations of of
non-violent
people but even deportations of
criminals islands has dropped
down
dramatically over the past five
years
what this administration has
decided
outside deferred action is that
they are
going to narrow the scope of
deportation
and virtually you're not going
to be
facing deportation unless you
are a
violent criminal and in fact
Obama's
former ice director said that
exact
thing to the only times last
year
well I mean let me just quote be
part of
what President Obama said he
said it's
heartbreaking for the millions
of
immigrants who made their lives
here who
raise their families here who
hope for
the opportunity to work to pay
taxes
didn't excuse me to pay taxes to
serve
in our military and more fully
contribute to the country
I think the American people are
the most
generous people on the planet
comes to
immigration we welcome in
our people for permanent
residency every
year than any other country on
the
planet by a mile
it's just that our generosity i
think is
being taken advantage of and I
think
Americans are starting to sour
on even
the concept of immigration
because they
see people who are not playing
by the
rules who are breaking the law
school
were actually lying to us
cutting in front of lines of
people who
are playing by the rules
taking the time and the money
and the
effort to do it the right way
what about that the look at life
is
messy and the undocumented
people don't
live in an apartment building
all by
themselves right so they marry
Americans
they have citizen children they
work
shoulder-to-shoulder with other
people
they go to mosque they go to
church they
go to synagogue with other folks
so the idea that we're going to
somehow
take take them all out and
remove them
and that that's not going to
upset the
fabric of this country is just
is just
foolish and scary
here's what we do know is that
in 2012
and the president asked
announced
deferred action for dreamers
that since
then we've had a over 700,000
young
people come forward get work
authorizations pay taxes get
better jobs
that to me is a program that
makes sense
not just for those families but
for the
country
so that's the direction I was a
just we
going very quick final work
until we see
an end to illegal immigration
and actual
commitment from our policymakers
to
actually enforce our immigration
laws
any type of legalization program
is just
going to encourage more people
to come
across the board to risk their
lives and
to overstate pieces
John theory Angela Maria Kelly
and
earlier
Marcia Coyle we thank you all
three
yeah
should they stay or should they
go
that's the question facing
British
voters today as they decide
their place
in Europe special correspondent
Malcolm
Brabant has the story from
London the
signs went up and doors to
polling
stations across Britain opened
for an
historic day of voting
it's been a bitter campaign to
decide
whether Britain remains within
four
exits the 28-member European
Union given
the momentous nature of the vote
Britons were on edge don't
really know
what to expect and I think of a
result
comes in kind of early in the
morning
everyone might be asleep still
and my
wake up to
that of different future on my
wake up
to just another day
the most recent polls show the
outcome
is too close to call
but bookies are putting the odds
on a
remain outcome of the referendum
opened
a chasm across Britain stirring
nationalist sentiments along the
way of
intimidation and the murder last
week of
pro-europe lawmaker joe cox can
also
influence the outcome of
marketing lips
which the divide was clear sir
funny psoriasis free for two
slender in
Buxton voted to leave in the
hope of
reducing immigration you see
what the
Margaret what they say as
flowers as a
people want to come in
having a powerful will be strong
enough
on our own for the nearby store
his
former schoolmate Steve sing one
that
breaks it would hurt the economy
business Weiss is easy there to
see them
to change their for Europe and I
was
shipping so you know my vote is
to stay
in our party leaders went to the
polls
to cast their votes but refrain
from
campaigning out right maybe
another
major factor that's perhaps
gonna play
into this referendum result has
been the
weather more than a month's
worth of
rain has been dumped on london
and the
south-east of the past day
causing
absolute chaos been pages the
chief
executive officer of sauce Maury
a major
polling firm
it's difficult to see a very
absolutely
certain pattern but it is true
that
breaks it voters are much more
determined than remain voters
the
british pound search today to
its
highest level this year because
of
market speculation that the
country will
ultimately vote to stay
the polls close
just over an hour and a half ago
voting
counting is is underway went for
a very
long night
the final results should be in
the
runabout breakfast time tomorrow
sorry Malcolm so now that the
polls have
closed what are you hearing
what's the latest
well normally these sort of
events you
have
exit polls but the broadcaster's
this
time decided that they wouldn't
have won
because there was no real model
for them
but we have heard that so you
kept the
United the United Kingdom
Independence
Party has had its own poll of
about
10,000 people and should be
around the
time the polls closed their
leader nigel
farage said he thought that the
remain
people hedged it which seems to
be very
much like a concession
he said though that you get was
a force
to be reckoned with them that
this
independence movement we would
not be
going away then to actually
consolidate
what seems to be this concession
there was also a poll that have
been
carried out during the course of
the day
by an Internet polling company
called
you go
and they've been looking at
around about
five thousand voters tracking
them
during the course of this
referendum and
according to their on the day
polling
their outcome is that it's fifty
two
percent for remain and
forty-eight
percent for those people who
want to
leave so the indications are
pretty
clear
of course you know there are
maybe sort
of as many as 30 or 35 million
votes to
be counted during the course
tonight and
that could change but these are
pretty
good indications and
and so I mean sent me in the
remain camp
at the moment
people are looking pretty
comfortable
you know how that when you talk
to the
people in the last couple of
days as you
are reporting the story out the
undecided are they aware of the
consequences
I mean they were undecided
voters even
up to the polls today yes i know
i think
the undecided voters really have
been
absolutely critical in this
and up until today that the
opinion
polls which don't necessarily be
trusted
for saying that but it might be
might
have been as many as about
eleven
percent of the electricity were
undecided and last night there
was a
very interesting debate on one
of the
British to TV channels which had
a
hundred people who were
undecided and it
tracked their emotions during
the course
of the debate is various issues
came up
and at the end of that debate
that what
happened was that most of those
people
who were undecided did vote to
remain
and what probably happened is
that
yeah i think there are lots of
people in
Britain you've just been really
were
welded by the arguments are not
able to
make up their minds at all and
it's a
pretty momentous decision to
have to go
into that voting booth and to
make up
your mind because the decision
that was
made today is completely
irrevocable to
leave the European Union that we
know
some coming back
and for many people this has
been a
campaign of loathing and fear
loathing
on the part of many of the
really them
and breakfasts who hate many of
the
things that the European Union
stands
for especially unelected and
unaccountable representatives
who they
believe are dictating to Britain
and
take away its authority and the
fear
element has been amongst those
people
who are worried but in
particular about
the economy and it is perhaps
the
economy which is actually driven
those people in the remain can
perhaps
because the easiest thing to do
is to
vote for the status quote people
have
been very worried about losing
their
jobs they've been worried by
predictions
by fairly major individuals in
industry
people like Sir Richard Branson
who say
it would be a complete mistake
to come
out of the European you
you and so not knowing what was
going to
be on the other out on the other
side of
this
that's why perhaps those people
have
been undecided have gone in into
the the
voting booths and they decided
to opt
for the status quo
all right special correspondent
Malcolm
Brabant joining us from London
thanks so
much
stay with us coming up on the
NewsHour
the losses all Americans face
when big
cities don't have enough housing
and a
brief but spectacular take on
why the oj
simpson trial still matters
today but
first it was a rare night and
morning in
congressional history
Democrats staged in all night
sitting in
demanding a vote on a plan to
ban anyone
on the government's terrorist
no-fly
list from buying a gun
lisa de Chardin begins our
coverage over
your house democrats emerged
from the
capital in the early afternoon
giving up
their 26 our sit-in
they vowed to keep fighting for
gun
control measures after the July
fourth
break when we come back here on
july in
the fifth
we're going to continue to push
to pull
this thing out
and if necessary just sit down
the scene
outside was nearly as rock is
the one
that played out yesterday and
overnight
inside chair declares the house
recess
for our 12 noon as Republicans
recessed
triggering an automatic shutdown
of the
official house cameras
Democrats took to social media
to
broadcast the back and forth on
the
floor from their cell phones
10pm House
Speaker Paul Ryan tried to
regain
control over Democrats chanting
possibly in order the order was
not
coming house cameras again . the
house
stands in recess Democrats kept
sitting
and standing on the floor until
Republicans return to a formal
session
again at two thirty AM and not
just any
session GOP leaders called for a
big
vote on a bill that included a
billion
dollars to fight the Zika virus
it passed without debate
actually most
reconsider is laid upon the
table and
Republicans closed out the
session until
after I for the house stands
adjourned
speaker Ryan facing this new
test had
biting words for Democrats today
we are
not going to allow stunts like
this to
stop us from carrying out the
people's
business
why do I call this is stunt well
because
it is one
let's just be honest here why a
stunt
Ryan pointed out that Democrats
sent out
multiple fundraising emails and
flyers
about the sit-in
he said it wasn't a proud moment
for
democracy but Democrats point
out that
eight years ago then minority
Republicans also held the house
floor in
protest
one key difference no cell phone
video
streaming then as the house
closed with
no action
there was a symbolic but
important vote
about the no fly list on the
Senate side
a bipartisan plan from Susan
Collins of
Maine with band gun purchases
from those
on the terror watch list
it survived a procedural vote
getting
support from 50 to senators the
issue
for the Collins plan it will
likely need
60 votes which it doesn't have
to make
it out of the Senate for the PBS
Newshour
i'm lisa de Chardin and joining
me now
from Capitol Hill is one of the
Democrats who helped organize
the sit-in
in the house is congressman
David
Cicilline of Rhode Island
congressman
welcome to the program first of
all did
you get any sleep at all last
night
I did not I actually haven't
pulled an
all-nighter since college so
after this
show i'm going to go home and go
to bed
why did Democrats
make what - was if not
unprecedented
move as we just heard close to
well I i think it was
unprecedented we
have been incredibly frustrated
at the
Republican House leadership
refusal to
bring to the floor - very common
sense
gun safety proposals one to keep
a
suspected terrorists who are on
the
watch list to prevent them from
buying a
gun and universal background
checks to
make sure that everyone who
purchase a
gun has a background check and
these are
two common-sense proposals the
Republican leadership in the
house has
refused to bring these bills to
the
floor and we've been incredibly
frustrated and we thought it was
important to try something new
to bring
attention to this issue to
demand that
the Republicans bring these
bills to the
floor for a vote to bring the
attention
of our country to this issue
we just saw an event the worst
mass
shooting in the history of the
united
states in orlando florida 49
people
slaughtered by an assault weapon
people injured and we seem to
see this
kind of carnage on a regular
basis and
so far the Republicans have been
unwilling to bring a single bill
to the
floor
that would respond to it and we
thought
this was really important to try
something different to demand
that they
move forward on these and this
was the
beginning of what will be a
protracted
effort to really encourage and
convince
and persuade and ultimately
force our
Republican colleagues to address
this
issue and make our communities
safer but
if you don't have the numbers
how do you
do that I heard speaker Ryan say
today
it actually did come up for a
vote in
committee it just didn't pass
out of
committee in order to get to the
floor
well both of the proposals that
the
proposal to make sure that
terrorists
can't buy a gun and make sure
there are
universal background checks are
supported broadly by the
American people
85 in ninety percent that
includes
Republicans and Democrats in
independence
so the american people support
this and
what was most gratifying about
last
night is we had a huge crowd
outside the
capital that was growing
throughout the
night
ordinary Americans that it come
to
Washington of capitol grounds to
support
our effort
this is going to require the
outside
engagement of folks all across
this
country to demand that Congress
do
what they think needs to be done
to keep
them safe this is one of the
issues
where the American people are
with us
we've got to keep them engaged
in this
fight him and finally convince
Republicans that they have a
responsibility to move forward
and keep
individuals who are on the
terrorist
watch list from buying a gun
make sure that all guns there's
a
subject to a background check
and really
continue to engage with people
all
across this country to demand
that
leaders in the Republican Party
bring
these bills to the floor for a
vote
but do you really think you're
going to
be able to do that i mean for
example
are there any Republicans have
come to
you or any of your Democratic
colleagues
and said I'm changing my mind
well I think there are
Republicans who
heard from their constituents
last night
and I think as they go home for
the
break I mean imagine in the
middle of
this argument we were asking
them
let's debate these bills tell us
why you
oppose them
tell us why you think people on
the
terrorist watch list should be
able to
my gun
tell us why you don't think
there should
be universal background checks
they
wouldn't come to the floor and
debate
those of course there's no good
argument
against either bill but what
they did
was at two thirty in the morning
in the
dark of night while America
slept
they used a procedural maneuver
to
adjourn
but they're gonna have to go
home and
their home now they're going to
hear
from their constituents who I
expect
going to say you need to pass
and common
sense gun safety legislation
so when we come back in July
fifth and
we resume our effort they will
have
heard from their constituents
and look
this is going to be a long
struggle but
i am confident that the end of
this we
will persuade our colleagues to
do
what's right for the American
people in
prevent people on the terrorist
watch
list from buying a gun
make sure we have universal
background
checks both things which can
really make
our communities safer and keep
guns out
of the hands of people who
shouldn't
have them
what do you what's your reaction
to
speakers Ryan's com pika Ryan's
comment
that this is just a stunt
designed to
get Democrats in front of the TV
cameras
look at that despite the fact
that
speaker Ryan turned off the
camera is
shut off our microphones
we're not going to be silenced
we were
able to use social media
periscope to make sure that the
American
people could see this debate
despite the fact that the
Republicans
didn't want them to see it but
look I
think if you speak to any of the
family
members who lost loved ones in
orlando
any of the parents of the
children slain
and Sandy Hook or uncle
community
college or San Bernardino or
aurora that
there's nothing that's a stunt
about
this this is about gun violence
which is
an epidemic in this country
ripping families apart which is
a really
serious public health crisis in
this
country and we have a
responsibility to
fight hard to enact proposals
that will
reduce gun violence in this
country and
we are going to use everything
at our
disposal
every tool that we have to
continue to
press hard to force the
Republicans to
take up these issues
the American people are
demanding it
they expect us to do something
and I can
assure you for the families and
victims
of gun violence in this country
they
don't think this was a stunt
they were pleased that we were
in this
fight trying to be sure their
voices
were heard in the Congress of
the United
States you expect they'll be
more
citizens
I expect we're going to do lots
more to
force the Republicans to finally
meet
their responsibilities and an
act
responsible gun safety
legislation
representative David Cicilline
of Rhode
Island who spent much of last
night
literally sitting on the house
floor
thank you very much thank you
and we do
hope to hear from Republican
lawmakers
in the coming days
yeah
the cost of buying or renting a
home and
key American cities keeps on
rising
a new study out finds more than
million households are spending
a third
of their income on rent and the
housing
shortage in cities like new york
washington in San Francisco may
be
costing more than a hundred
million
American workers thousands of
dollars in
lost wages special correspondent
water
Gerald you know explains why is
part of
our weekly series on making
sense of
financial news
you can hear so much with this
old
building every sort of step
yeah it's like every every creak
Brian
handling has multiple graduate
degrees a
steady job and a middle-class
income
this is it right here it
probably hasn't
been renovated since the
Eisenhower
administration yet at 34 years
old he is
the substance of a woman lucky
enough to
have a rent-controlled apartment
but
Hanlon's time is running out
I've been in this room for about
four
and a half years or and a half
years he
where is the owner of his
apartment
house will offer the actual
lease holder
a lot of money to move
meaning handling will have to
pay a lot
more to live in this mission
district
neighborhood
well so market rate for this
place i'm
guessing is probably it would
probably
about five thousand dollars a
month
$5,000 amount of three bedroom
in the
mission
sure the situation is forcing
your
growing number of people low
medium and
high income workers into ever
tighter
living conditions and some with
no
income out of their homes all
together
I got here because I have
nowhere to go
Claudia roger has lived on this
sidewalk
since losing her assembly line
job last
year and it was on this rapidly
gentrifying but still gritty
street that
she says she almost lost her
life
how tall with the flames he was
being
was like like this building and
if it
helped dog big dog window a huge
fire
started by someone throwing
gasoline on
her tent at 3am with her inside
I just say the fire boom like a
table
can't push me
chef I was panicked and I get up
and I
wrong we're not sure
nothing everything started
getting fired
in sight it's not me it's really
other
helping road shower handle and
find a
stable place to live is
complicated by a
long list of roadblocks faced by
developers who want to construct
high-density homes
I run growing that also housing
activists laura clark founded a
group
called Rose San Francisco to
push for
fewer restrictions which even
she admits
were designed with good
intention it
comes historically from a very
good
plate
originally there was a lot of
really
good work done to say we
shouldn't be
blasting highways through our
cities we
really need to take an
environmental
perspective about a lot of the
urban
rejuvenation we were doing and
then it
kind of went to kind of a toxic
place
one example
shadow studies shadow studies
yeah where
we research where the shadows
are going
to fall
it was hard to believe shadows
and other
seemingly minor factors could
actually
prevent the construction of new
housing
in a city that by some estimates
needs
tens if not hundreds of
thousands more
homes
so we track down Jeff Buckley at
San
Francisco City Hall
he's the mayor senior housing
advisor as
part of a voter mandate which
was
established in the eighties
there are
some public open spaces that
cannot have
shadow and in them and others
when they
have a shadow budget shadow
budgets
correct which is a small amount
of
shadow that is allowed in those
areas
during certain types of shadows
normally these environmental
concerns
these are issues community
groups and
even individuals used to block
new
construction often targeting
market rate
or luxury housing but San
Francisco is
trying to cut the red tape and
has an
ambitious goal of adding 30,000
new
housing units by 2020 half of
them
subsidized there a lot of
critics will
say you need to be focused on
total
supply and not necessarily
affordability
I think that works well in an
economist
think tank but in the reality of
politics
and the policy making in an
urban
environment you need to figure
out not
just a total unit amount but how
to make
those units affordable for
people who
live here in the city but as
economist .
out more total housing would
lower rents
for everyone
one of the most progressive
policies
that this progressive City the
dark
would be to build more housing
and Rico
already is an economist at UC
Berkeley
where he studies the
relationship
between housing and employment
I think this is a perfect
example of how
broken the planning process is
some c-spot there's a developer
who
would like to add three under 45
units
on the top of walgreen and
brother think
there yet protesters have
blocked this
mission district project for
years
in part yes because of the
shadows it
would cast the same goes for a
250 unit
project on Market Street which
would
replace this low rise building
and
parking lot
the net result is that very few
thousand
units get building San Francisco
welcome to the demand and that
says more
already has far-reaching effects
he and his colleagues at the
university
of chicago took a mathematical
model
normally used to study the
economic
effects of immigration
restrictions
between countries and applied it
within
the United States crunching
decade's
worth of data from 220 us metro
areas
they found five American cities
did not
contribute as much to us
economic growth
as they would have if they had
more
housing
according to the research the
crunch in the bay area in New
York
Boston in Washington is not just
stressing local runners but also
shrinking the incomes of every
American
worker some 100 million people
there's a loss for the entire
nation we
met already at the San Francisco
Federal
Reserve where he's a fellow he
says
restricted land use policies are
keeping
people out of cities like San
Francisco
how much money with the average
american
worker actually earn if these
policies
were in place in these five
cities we
estimate about five thousand
dollars in
additional earnings for the
average
worker five thousand dollars in
lost
wages 500 billion dollars in
Miss gdp
yes if this five American cities
were to
lower the level of land use
regulation
to the level of the median
American city
and we will see increased
economic
growth increase GDP and higher
wages and
not just in those cities but
across the
country according to them
already
these five cities are places
where
specialized workers cluster
making each
member more productive and
therefore
better paid if they loosened
development
restrictions so more
homes could be built rents would
fall
making it easier for newcomers
with high
earning potential to break into
the club
more people would relocate from
different part of the country's
to take
advantage of this hyperactivity
and his
high wages
this would benefit those who
move
because they would have better
paying
jobs
it would also benefit those who
stay
behind because it will be more
available
judge in those communities than
there is
now but as it stands
that's not happening and even
the most
highly educated workers in
cities like
San Francisco are concerned
about the
roof over their heads
I have a one-bedroom apartment
you know
if you wanna have a family or
something
that that's kind of limiting
kyle Hugh
is a highly paid software
engineer who
feel stuck in his small rent
regulated
apartment is simply to rent my
current
place would cost so much more
money now
that trading up to a better
place seems
you know even more even more
daunting
everybody talks for Lee about
the
techies ah the techies are also
living
with roommates or in converted
rooms
ah yeah it's it's kind of
ridiculous
even the people who you want to
hate who
are making hundreds of thousands
of
dollars are struggling to find
housing
in the city it's a real crisis
so Carl you we can trade up
Brian
handling may be pushed out
there's a real chance that i
would just
leave the bay area and millions
of
American workers may be taking a
five-thousand-dollar hit
they're not even aware of in San
Francisco
duarte geraldi know for the PBS
news
yeah
and now to another in our brief
but
spectacular series where we ask
interesting people to describe
their
passions oj simpson has been the
subject
of several TV and theatrical
programs
this year including an ESPN
documentary
and FX channel series and a play
watching oj by writer David
McMillan
here
he explains why the 20 year old
verdict
still matters today and a
warning
it contains some explicit
language I
remember the oj simpson trial
very
vividly i'll never forget the
day that
the verdict was announced
because I was
hanging out with my friend a
white guy
Chris Brown we saw these two
black
friends of ours who are
celebrating and
Chris was like how can you guys
be happy
that oj was acquitted and one of
the
black girls said no he didn't
kill that
white
I will never forget that and it
was a
moment where he realized he
didn't know
the people that he went to
school with
I decided to write a play about
not the
trial itself but people watching
the
trial and their reactions to it
unfortunately the play has
become even
more timely in the last couple
of years
it speaks to where we are in our
present
moment
race is a topic that is getting
a lot of
attention these days but at the
same
time people are afraid to start
that
conversation and how to start
their
conversation the watching oj
takes place
on the day that the oj simpson
verdict
was announced that when these
types of
moments happen suddenly you
realize
maybe I don't know my coworker
or my
friend as as well as I thought I
did
I tried to capture as many
different
points of view as I could and
one saying
you have two characters Jamal
and
allison one black one white one
is from
brentwood one from the hood
they can't possibly believe that
the
other person thinks what they
think
please tell me you think he's
guilty why
does my opinion matter
I suppose doesn't on the grand
scheme
but it's a good litmus test for
what
to determine whether or not
you're a
sane rational human being
another character derek has
asian
american shares his perspective
on the
trial based on his parents who
are
Korean American and how they
were
affected by the LA riots
part of me wants them to get
acquitted
because i want to see a repeat
what
happened here three years ago
and
sparing my parents the heartache
of
seeing their store destroyed
again means
letting a guilty man go free
I'm willing to live with that
for a lot
of African Americans they saw
the trial
not as an indictment of OJ
Simpson but
really as an indictment of the
LAPD one
of the other characters in the
play Kim
has two sons one who's in school
and the
other who's in prison and she's
looking
at this trial not caring whether
or not
oj did it she just wants a win
that would just be a win for him
that'd
be a win for all of us for all
the black
men
that's been railroaded by the
system and
for all their mothers who had to
stand
by and watch for once
we'll finally get a taste of
what
justice feels like
and for once we could finally
say yes
god damn it we got one you
mother
yeah we got one race is
something that
we will always have to deal with
as a
country our country was founded
on
de jure segregation and racism
and
slavery and so those issues are
part of
the fabric whether we like it or
not and
i thought the verdict and what
it
brought out in people not again
not the
trial itself but what it brought
out in
people
was it was a moment a moment
where
America got to see itself
reflected back
to itself we see the country
that we are
as opposed the country that we
think we
are
my name is David McMillan and
this is my
brief but spectacular tape on
the oj
simpson verdict and why it still
matters
today and you can find more
episodes of
our brief but spectacular series
at
pbs.org / news hour / brief also
on the
NewsHour online right now how do
US
officials regard the UK brexit
vote
Margaret Warner takes a closer
look
Plus self-driving cars could
improve
public safety by limiting
fatalities in
traffic accidents but a new
study spot
lights a moral quandary in how
we choose
to program those cars
all that and more is on our
website
kpbs.org slash news our tune in
later
tonight on Charlie Rose former
acting
CIA director Mike Morell and
former vice
chairman of the joint chiefs of
staff
James Winfield on the fight
against Isis
and extremism and that's the
NewsHour
for tonight I'm hari Sreenivasan
and I'm
Judy Woodruff join us online and
again
right here tomorrow evening with
mark
shields and David Brooks for all
of us
at the PBS Newshour thank you
and good
night
the PBS Newshour your home for
politics
this is not something you could
support
you want to paint in bold colors
reporting from around the world
so why
is this place such a crossroads
stories
with impact that inspire in game
on
health making economic sense
Education
Science and Technology
and the arts every night on PBS
yeah
you are watching PBS